README.md, before:

# pyqwer

*Quickly configure a newly installed Ubuntu environment for Python development using asdf-python and an opinionated set of tools.*

----

This project provides a set of scripts for setting up a comprehensive command-line-driven Python development environment on Ubuntu, including tools I frequently use, like `asdf`, `python-launcher`, `pipx`, `build`, `tox`, `pre-commit`, and `cookiecutter`.

In addition to updating Ubuntu and installing dependencies and tools, it automatically installs the three latest minor versions of Python using [asdf](https://asdf-vm.com/) (via the [asdf-python](https://github.com/asdf-community/asdf-python) plugin, which uses [pyenv](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv)) for development and testing.

I made this to speed up my tinkering and experiments and to ensure that even for trivial projects, I always start with a base foundation that can easily support and encourage proper multi-version testing and distribution packaging. In the past, I always overlooked distribution packaging when starting a new project. I now realize how important it is, not just for sharing code, but to help enforce cohesion and encapsulation and to create a mindset that creates opportunities for composition.

This is definitely a script I made for myself, but if you find this helpful, that's great, too!

## Features

- **System Update**: Automatically updates and upgrades the system using APT.
- **Dependencies Installation**: Installs necessary dependencies for asdf, Python, and python-launcher.
- **Python Version Management**: Installs multiple Python versions using asdf and sets the global Python version.
- **Python-Launcher**: Installs [python-launcher](https://python-launcher.app/) via `cargo` for easy Python version switching on Linux.
- **Development Tools**: Installs essential Python development tools using pipx.
- **asdf Installation**: Installs asdf (version v0.14.1). Check [asdf-vm.com](https://asdf-vm.com/guide/getting-started.html#_2-download-asdf) for the latest branch version and modify the script as needed to use the latest.

## Scripts

1. `pyqwer.sh`: The main script to set up the development environment.
2. `latest-pythons.py`: A Python script that gets called by `pyqwer.sh` to automate the installation of the latest minor Python versions using asdf.
3. `pyqwer-from-github.sh`: A script to download and execute the setup and installer scripts directly from GitHub. This is the recommended way of running the scripts.

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- A running Ubuntu system (native or via WSL2 or another VM)
- Internet access for downloading required packages and tools

### WSL2 Cheat Sheet (Optional)

You don't need WSL2 to use pyqwer, but if you are using WSL2 to host Ubuntu you may find these notes helpful.

I typically use WSL2 on Windows 11 to host my Ubuntu development environment. But this script will work for a native Ubuntu system or one hosted on another VM platform.

Here is my cheat sheet to create and tear down my WSL2 environment:

#### List Existing WSL2 Distributions

You might want to start by identifying any WSL2 distributions already installed:

```cmd
(cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl --list
```

On my system I see that I already have an Ubuntu distro installed:

```PS C:\Users\marmo> wsl --list
Windows Subsystem for Linux Distributions:
Ubuntu-24.04 (Default)
PS C:\Users\marmo>
```

This Ubuntu-24.04 is old and unused, and since I want to start fresh I'll remove it like this

Remove and **delete** the entire Ubuntu system (you will *lose any work in this instance*):

```cmd
(cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl --unregister Ubuntu-24.04
```

I will then install a fresh Ubuntu-24.04 system like this

```cmd
(cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl --install -d Ubuntu-24.04
```

#### Setting Up Ubuntu in WSL2

This will install WSL2 and Ubuntu if you have not set up WSL yet in Windows 11:

```cmd
(Admin cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl --install
```

To update WSL2 itself:

```cmd
(cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl --update
```

To see installed distros:

```cmd
(cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl -l -v
```

Look at online available distros:

```cmd
(cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl --list --online
```

Install a distro by name:

```cmd
(cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl --install -d Ubuntu-24.04
```

After this runs, you must manually set up a username and password from the root shell:

Add a new user called marmor:

```bash
adduser marmor
```

Add the user to the sudo group:

```bash
usermod -aG sudo marmor
```

Change the default user to avoid launching into the root shell:

Exit WSL and run this from your Windows command prompt (CMD or PowerShell):

```PS
wsl -d Ubuntu-24.04 -u marmor
```

if that does not seem to work, try this, which worked when the command above did not:

```PS
ubuntu2004 config --default-user marmor
```

#### Tearing Down Ubuntu in WSL2

Shut down *ALL* the WSL distros:

```cmd
(cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl --shutdown
```

Terminate Ubuntu on WSL2 (or any specific named distro):

```cmd
(cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl -t Ubuntu-24.04
```

Remove and **delete** the entire Ubuntu system (you will *lose any work in this instance*):

```cmd
(cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl --unregister Ubuntu-24.04
```

## Installation

This script was developed to be run on a fresh install of Ubuntu as a quick start to development.

**Please do not run this on a system that already has things you care about on it!**

### Method 1 (recommended): Run directly from GitHub

The recommended way to run the script is directly from GitHub using `curl`. Ubuntu includes `curl` and `bash`, which should already be on your newly installed system.

The command below downloads the setup and installer scripts from the GitHub repository and executes them on your Ubuntu system.

To install and set up the Python development environment, run the following command as your local user (not as root):

```bash
curl -sL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mmarmor/pyqwer/main/pyqwer-from-github.sh | bash
```

After the script finishes run `source` to apply the changes made to your environment variables in the current shell session.

```bash
source ~/.bashrc
```

### Method 2: Clone this project to your Unbuntu system and run the scripts manually

If you don't want to run the code from GitHub, you can also use `git` to clone this repository to your home directory. You then make the files executable with `chmod` and `source` the shell script to start the program.

Here are the commands:

```bash
cd ~
git clone https://github.com/mmarmor/pyqwer.git
sudo chmod +x pyqwer.sh latest-pythons.py
source pyqwer.sh
```

After the script finishes run `source` to apply the changes made to your environment variables in the current shell session.

```bash
source ~/.bashrc
```

## Verify Installations

Verify python-launcher and show the installed Python versions:

```bash
py --list
```

Verify asdf and show the installed Python versions:

```bash
asdf list python
```

Default is the highest version. Use flags to launch specific versions of Python:

```bash
py
py -3.12
py -3.11
 ```

Directly check Python versions (assuming here that 3.13 is the most recent version):

```bash
python --version
python3.13 --version
python3.12 --version
python3.11 --version
```

Verify pipx Tools:

```bash
pipx list
```

Test python-launcher:

```bash
py --version
py -3.13 --version
```

## Project Creation

You can now proceed with using your newly set up Python development environment.

```bash
mkdir code
cd code/
mkdir my-python-package
cd my-python-package/
asdf list python
```

Here we go: create the virtual python environment for our project:

```bash
py -m venv .venv
```

Or a specific Python version:

```bash
py -3.11 -m venv .venv
```

You will not see any output if the command is successful, but you should see a .venv/ directory created. python-launcher on Linux systems will pick up on the presence of this new virtual environment and use it by default whenever you are in this directory or its child directories. The Python launcher for Windows will pick up the virtual environment if that virtual environment is currently active.

Going forward, you’ll be able to use the py command in your project and be sure you’re always getting the copy of Python from your project’s virtual environment unless you explicitly ask for a different (base) Python. This can reduce your cognitive load, because you don’t need to remember to activate or deactivate the virtual environment manually each time you start or stop work on the project.

### Visual Studio Code WSL Setup

To run Visual Studio Code on your Windows host and use the VS Code Server on your Ubuntu WSL, you don't need to install the full VS Code package on your Ubuntu WSL system. Instead, you can connect to the WSL from your Windows VS Code installation. Here’s how to do it:

Install the WSL Extension for VS Code:

- Open VS Code on your Windows machine.
- Go to the Extensions view by clicking on the Extensions icon on the sidebar or pressing `Ctrl+Shift+X`.
- Search for "WSL" and install the Visual Studio Code WSL extension (just called `WSL`). This is an official extensions created by Microsoft. This extensions allows you to use VS Code with WSL and will handle installing the VS Code Server on the WSL side.

Rather than initiating VS Code from within Ubuntu, I have had better luck starting VS Code on Windows and then connecting to WSL from there.

Verify the Setup:

Check that you are connected to the WSL by looking at the bottom-left corner of the VS Code window. It should show WSL: Ubuntu (or your specific WSL distro name). You can also open the integrated terminal in VS Code (``Ctrl+` ``) to confirm it’s running in WSL.

## Customization

This script installs the three most recent minor versions of Python (for example, 3.13.X, 3.12.X, 3.11.X) and sets the most recent (3.13.X in the example) as the global default. You can customize the number of Python versions to install by modifying the `count` parameter in the `install_python_versions` function call inside `latest-pythons.py`.

## License

This project is licensed under the GNU General Public License v3.0 - see the [COPYING](COPYING) file for details.

## Author

- [Michael Marmor](https://michaelmarmor.com/)

If you want to connect with me, the best way is through [my website](https://michaelmarmor.com/).

Commit message:

Update docs for aider/playwright

README.md, after:

# pyqwer

*Quickly configure a newly installed Ubuntu environment for Python development using asdf-python and an opinionated set of tools.*

----

This project provides a set of scripts for setting up a comprehensive command-line-driven Python development environment on Ubuntu, including tools I frequently use, like `asdf`, `python-launcher`, `pipx`, `build`, `tox`, `pre-commit`, and `cookiecutter`. For AI assisted coding, it also installs [Aider](https://aider.chat/) and [Playwright](https://playwright.dev/python/docs/browsers#install-system-dependencies) with the chromium dependency.

In addition to updating Ubuntu and installing dependencies and tools, it automatically installs the three latest minor versions of Python using [asdf](https://asdf-vm.com/) (via the [asdf-python](https://github.com/asdf-community/asdf-python) plugin, which uses [pyenv](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv)) for development and testing.

I made this to speed up my tinkering and experiments and to ensure that even for trivial projects, I always start with a base foundation that can easily support and encourage proper multi-version testing and distribution packaging. In the past, I always overlooked distribution packaging when starting a new project. I now realize how important it is, not just for sharing code, but to help enforce cohesion and encapsulation and to create a mindset that creates opportunities for composition.

This is definitely a script I made for myself, but if you find this helpful, that's great, too!

## Features

- **System Update**: Automatically updates and upgrades the system using APT.
- **Dependencies Installation**: Installs necessary dependencies for asdf, Python, and python-launcher.
- **Python Version Management**: Installs multiple Python versions using asdf and sets the global Python version.
- **Python-Launcher**: Installs [python-launcher](https://python-launcher.app/) via `cargo` for easy Python version switching on Linux.
- **Development Tools**: Installs essential Python development tools using pipx.
- **asdf Installation**: Installs asdf (version v0.14.1). Check [asdf-vm.com](https://asdf-vm.com/guide/getting-started.html#_2-download-asdf) for the latest branch version and modify the script as needed to use the latest.

## Scripts

1. `pyqwer.sh`: The main script to set up the development environment.
2. `latest-pythons.py`: A Python script that gets called by `pyqwer.sh` to automate the installation of the latest minor Python versions using asdf.
3. `pyqwer-from-github.sh`: A script to download and execute the setup and installer scripts directly from GitHub. This is the recommended way of running the scripts.

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- A running Ubuntu system (native or via WSL2 or another VM)
- Internet access for downloading required packages and tools

### WSL2 Cheat Sheet (Optional)

You don't need WSL2 to use pyqwer, but if you are using WSL2 to host Ubuntu you may find these notes helpful.

I typically use WSL2 on Windows 11 to host my Ubuntu development environment. But this script will work for a native Ubuntu system or one hosted on another VM platform.

Here is my cheat sheet to create and tear down my WSL2 environment:

#### List Existing WSL2 Distributions

You might want to start by identifying any WSL2 distributions already installed:

```cmd
(cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl --list
```

On my system I see that I already have an Ubuntu distro installed:

```PS C:\Users\marmo> wsl --list
Windows Subsystem for Linux Distributions:
Ubuntu-24.04 (Default)
PS C:\Users\marmo>
```

This Ubuntu-24.04 is old and unused, and since I want to start fresh I'll remove it like this

Remove and **delete** the entire Ubuntu system (you will *lose any work in this instance*):

```cmd
(cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl --unregister Ubuntu-24.04
```

I will then install a fresh Ubuntu-24.04 system like this

```cmd
(cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl --install -d Ubuntu-24.04
```

#### Setting Up Ubuntu in WSL2

This will install WSL2 and Ubuntu if you have not set up WSL yet in Windows 11:

```cmd
(Admin cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl --install
```

To update WSL2 itself:

```cmd
(cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl --update
```

To see installed distros:

```cmd
(cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl -l -v
```

Look at online available distros:

```cmd
(cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl --list --online
```

Install a distro by name:

```cmd
(cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl --install -d Ubuntu-24.04
```

After this runs, you must manually set up a username and password from the root shell:

Add a new user called marmor:

```bash
adduser marmor
```

Add the user to the sudo group:

```bash
usermod -aG sudo marmor
```

Change the default user to avoid launching into the root shell:

Exit WSL and run this from your Windows command prompt (CMD or PowerShell):

```PS
wsl -d Ubuntu-24.04 -u marmor
```

if that does not seem to work, try this, which worked when the command above did not:

```PS
ubuntu2004 config --default-user marmor
```

#### Tearing Down Ubuntu in WSL2

Shut down *ALL* the WSL distros:

```cmd
(cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl --shutdown
```

Terminate Ubuntu on WSL2 (or any specific named distro):

```cmd
(cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl -t Ubuntu-24.04
```

Remove and **delete** the entire Ubuntu system (you will *lose any work in this instance*):

```cmd
(cmd or PowerShell) PS C:\> wsl --unregister Ubuntu-24.04
```

## Installation

This script was developed to be run on a fresh install of Ubuntu as a quick start to development.

**Please do not run this on a system that already has things you care about on it!**

### Method 1 (recommended): Run directly from GitHub

The recommended way to run the script is directly from GitHub using `curl`. Ubuntu includes `curl` and `bash`, which should already be on your newly installed system.

The command below downloads the setup and installer scripts from the GitHub repository and executes them on your Ubuntu system.

To install and set up the Python development environment, run the following command as your local user (not as root):

```bash
curl -sL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mmarmor/pyqwer/main/pyqwer-from-github.sh | bash
```

After the script finishes run `source` to apply the changes made to your environment variables in the current shell session.

```bash
source ~/.bashrc
```

### Method 2: Clone this project to your Unbuntu system and run the scripts manually

If you don't want to run the code from GitHub, you can also use `git` to clone this repository to your home directory. You then make the files executable with `chmod` and `source` the shell script to start the program.

Here are the commands:

```bash
cd ~
git clone https://github.com/mmarmor/pyqwer.git
sudo chmod +x pyqwer.sh latest-pythons.py
source pyqwer.sh
```

After the script finishes run `source` to apply the changes made to your environment variables in the current shell session.

```bash
source ~/.bashrc
```

## Verify Installations

Verify python-launcher and show the installed Python versions:

```bash
py --list
```

Verify asdf and show the installed Python versions:

```bash
asdf list python
```

Default is the highest version. Use flags to launch specific versions of Python:

```bash
py
py -3.12
py -3.11
 ```

Directly check Python versions (assuming here that 3.13 is the most recent version):

```bash
python --version
python3.13 --version
python3.12 --version
python3.11 --version
```

Verify pipx Tools:

```bash
pipx list
```

Test python-launcher:

```bash
py --version
py -3.13 --version
```

## Project Creation

You can now proceed with using your newly set up Python development environment.

```bash
mkdir code
cd code/
mkdir my-python-package
cd my-python-package/
asdf list python
```

Here we go: create the virtual python environment for our project:

```bash
py -m venv .venv
```

Or a specific Python version:

```bash
py -3.11 -m venv .venv
```

You will not see any output if the command is successful, but you should see a .venv/ directory created. python-launcher on Linux systems will pick up on the presence of this new virtual environment and use it by default whenever you are in this directory or its child directories. The Python launcher for Windows will pick up the virtual environment if that virtual environment is currently active.

Going forward, you’ll be able to use the py command in your project and be sure you’re always getting the copy of Python from your project’s virtual environment unless you explicitly ask for a different (base) Python. This can reduce your cognitive load, because you don’t need to remember to activate or deactivate the virtual environment manually each time you start or stop work on the project.

### Visual Studio Code WSL Setup

To run Visual Studio Code on your Windows host and use the VS Code Server on your Ubuntu WSL, you don't need to install the full VS Code package on your Ubuntu WSL system. Instead, you can connect to the WSL from your Windows VS Code installation. Here’s how to do it:

Install the WSL Extension for VS Code:

- Open VS Code on your Windows machine.
- Go to the Extensions view by clicking on the Extensions icon on the sidebar or pressing `Ctrl+Shift+X`.
- Search for "WSL" and install the Visual Studio Code WSL extension (just called `WSL`). This is an official extensions created by Microsoft. This extensions allows you to use VS Code with WSL and will handle installing the VS Code Server on the WSL side.

Rather than initiating VS Code from within Ubuntu, I have had better luck starting VS Code on Windows and then connecting to WSL from there.

Verify the Setup:

Check that you are connected to the WSL by looking at the bottom-left corner of the VS Code window. It should show WSL: Ubuntu (or your specific WSL distro name). You can also open the integrated terminal in VS Code (``Ctrl+` ``) to confirm it’s running in WSL.

## Customization

This script installs the three most recent minor versions of Python (for example, 3.13.X, 3.12.X, 3.11.X) and sets the most recent (3.13.X in the example) as the global default. You can customize the number of Python versions to install by modifying the `count` parameter in the `install_python_versions` function call inside `latest-pythons.py`.

## License

This project is licensed under the GNU General Public License v3.0 - see the [COPYING](COPYING) file for details.

## Author

- [Michael Marmor](https://michaelmarmor.com/)

If you want to connect with me, the best way is through [my website](https://michaelmarmor.com/).
